---
title: Importance of Focus, Work/Life Balance and some Tips.
date: "2018-03-03T23:46:37.121Z"
---
![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1280/0*5Dx0ccSNf9TcUePX.)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Photo by [Evan
Dennis](https://unsplash.com/@evan__bray?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)</span>

I’ll start with some specifics about me. I’m 53 years old (as of 2018) and have
been a professional developer since 1990. For all intents and purposes, that was
back in the pre-object-oriented days. Sure there were a few practicing OO back
then, but the majority were not. Back in 1998 I started my web development
journey. I got good. I mean real good. There was a time when I was considered
the best at the company I work for. A short time… maybe 5 to 7 years. Believe
me, I’m not bragging. You’ll see that in just a bit.

I got to the point where I could do just about anything with HTML, javascript
and just a smidgen of CSS. Once I had a department ask me to redo their Flash
(remember Flash?) site in HTML. They had all kinds of shapes popping in and out
on mouseover and other various movements happening with elements on the page.

Oh how I had SO much fun remaking that. It took a few weeks and admittedly, it
wasn’t quite as good as the Flash site, but I was very proud of it. I thought,
“Wow! I’m really good at this.” Pffff. I had a rude awakening later.

Then I did a couple of high-profile sites for our HR department and they turned
out really well. I built my own CMS from the ground up (’cause that’s the way
you did it back then). And people were like, “That’s awesome!”

BTW, I rarely did this in a vacuum. Usually I had another developer working with
me, but those developers were typically heads-down, I-gotta-get-this-done type
developers. I was more of a, this-is-awesome-I-gotta-try-it or
this-sounds-like-fun-I-think-I’ll-waste-tons-of-time-figuring-it-out, kind of
developer. “Ohhh.. a shiny object!”. That was me.

Anyway, my career went pretty good from there. Remember the people that said,
“That’s awesome”? Well, a bunch more started saying, “Can you do this for me?
And that? And this other thing?” I could ‘do anything’ and did and people
thought highly of me because of it. This was the beginning of the end.

At one time I counted and found that I was responsible for more than 50 sites
and applications. Many of them using myriad tools. Things like: HTML,
javascript, CSS, ASP.Net, VB, VB.Net, c#, Winforms, console, SQL, Oracle, batch,
IIS, Apache, Java, Sharepoint, .Net framework (versions 1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.5, 2,
2.1, 2.4, 3, 3.5, 4, ad infinitum), MVC, Entity Framework, Angular (1.x and 2),
TFS, github, etc...

I woke up one day and realized, “I’m barely okay at any of these. I’m not an
expert, good or even mediocre at any one of them (asp.net was probably my
strongest). I needed to focus more. Get good at just a handful. The problem? I
couldn’t. I was always buried maintaining all the past work I’d done. Sure, most
of them were rock-solid, but with 50+, something always needed either fixing or
upgrading. I couldn’t focus.

Meanwhile, all these 20 somethings were coming in and passing me up like I was
standing still. They were able to focus and get really good at a particular
skill or small set of skills. Many times I’d counsel these youngsters to keep it
that way if they could. A few times I even said, “If you find yourself getting
spread thin and not able to focus, you NEED to move on. You’re young and/or
haven’t started a family. You can take a chance and do it. Trust me, it’s in
your best interest.”

It was at that time that I started trying to carve out time to specialize. At
first it was javascript. I could see the writing in the sky (not ‘on the wall’
that has negative connotations). Javascript was becoming king. More and more
tools were coming out making developing for javascript thrilling, fun and
enjoyable. And then there was Node. You could run javascript on a freakin’
server and do pretty much anything with it. Even more with various NPM packages.

So for a little while I would spend a half hour to an hour every night trying to
learn it. It didn’t last. I started getting burned out. Always completely
exhausted and unable to focus on anything day and night. I then noticed
something that I should’ve noticed a long time ago. My four boys were not
getting any quality time from me and hadn’t for quite some time. So I stopped. I
just put my ‘nose to the grind stone’ (look it up if you don’t understand the
reference. it’s a good one to know) and did my job and tried to spend more time
with my kids.

All this time these 20-somethings just kept passing me up, left and right. I
became more and more depressed about work. I wanted so badly to focus and get
really good at something. I didn’t see myself as adding any real value to the
company, even though I really was. We call it ‘keeping the wheels on the bus’
syndrome and there’s nothing wrong with it. It’s good work. Someone famous once
said, “There is no work beneath you, except sloppy or incomplete work” —
paraphrased. Also, I didn’t feel like I was adding value at home.

I then did something REALLY stupid, even though later you’ll see it might be
working out. A new position opened up in our brand new Internet of Things
department. I thought, “you know what? I’m going to apply for that and see if I
can get it.” Mind you, they were using some technologies that I’d just barely
heard of (AWS, lambdas, grunt, Jenkins, xcode, node, elastic search, etc…). I
was SO happy when they hired me. I thought, FINALLY… I can offload all my past
work and focus on something. Boy was I wrong.

I started working for the IoT department with the understanding that I’d work
90% for them and 10% on my old stuff until it could get transitioned to someone
else. Most of you can probably guess what happened. That someone else never came
along and still hasn’t to this day and yes I’m STILL doing some work on my old
stuff.

My IoT work suffered for it, but the management there was and has been very
understanding. They know all too well that the wheels must remain on the bus.

Meanwhile, I started thinking about the work/life balance again and how to fix
it so that I could interact with my kids in a meaningful way and still be able
to focus on learning some skill(s). Something occurred to me to try. I plopped
my laptop down on the dining room table and began to learn. The important
ingredient here though is that I had every expectation that my kids would
interrupt that learning and want to ask questions, ask for money, talk about the
latest game they were playing or something cool that happened at school or gasp…
even about their girlfriends. I had determined that while I wanted to learn a
new skill and get really good at it, my kids needed me and I needed them. They
were FAR more important than the latest technological kid on the block. I
mentally prepared myself for the fact that they would interrupt and I had to be
okay with that.

You know what? I’ve had some of the best conversations, laughs and generally
good relationship building experiences I’ve ever had at that table lately. The
important thing is they know they’re loved and I know that I’m loved.

So… how are things on the IoT and learning front?

I recently went to my boss and said, “I need to get rid of this old stuff, can
we please come up with a plan to transfer it to someone else?” He said, “Sure,
let’s do it. Tim, I want you to be successful because it’s good for the company,
it’s good for me and it’s good for you.” I don’t usually cry, but wow I was
close then.

We came up with a plan and for the past couple months, I’ve been successfully
implementing it. The old department still hasn’t hired an employee to replace
me, but they did get a contractor. At first, I was worried about this because
when that contract was up I felt I’d have to do it all over again. However, my
boss and I sat down with their management and drew a line in some fairly firm
sand saying something akin to, “Tim does knowledge transfers to the contractor.
If that contractor leaves and no one else knows the stuff, that’s your problem.
So you need to pass that knowledge on amongst yourselves. Tim can NOT be doing
these transfers in perpetuity.”

I’ve got one more knowledge transfer to do next week and I’m done.

Lately, just knowing that, has given me more energy (at work and home) and more
enthusiasm about learning. Not just about learning React (BTW, that’s my new
learning path and I’ll explain why in the next article), but about learning the
handful of technologies in our IoT department too.

Who knows what the future holds, but I seem to be on the right trajectory.

If you’re new at this or a veteran… I don’t usually give advice, but please
listen to these points. They should be immutable.

* Faith and family first. Always. No matter what.<br> That doesn’t mean you blow
off work because of them. God made us to work. It’s one of our primary functions
in life. Witness for Him. Part of that witness, part of telling others about Him
is doing our very best at work. Faith and family first is non-negotiable, but
should NEVER be an excuse.
* Focus. No matter what.<br> Focus in your faith (be sure to read/study the bible
and pray regularly)<br> Focus on your family (make yourself available)<br> Focus
on your health (without it, things tend to fall apart).<br> Focus on your work
(I love the
[pomodoro](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=4&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjl_uT3xNDZAhVF3FMKHSbuDFgQFghTMAM&url=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomodoro_Technique&usg=AOvVaw2-nvyY6oBMewQ5_5WD-vmm)
technique. It just works for me, but find SOME way of focusing).<br> Focus on
your learning, but not at the expense of any of the above. Find some way to
balance it.<br> Focus in all these areas is essential to quality of life.

These may seem like no-brainers to some, but I’m guessing I’m not the only one
out there that’s had this type of journey.

Of course, things aren’t perfect and sometimes life gets in the way of itself,
but I know I’m headed in the right general direction. Because of these changes,
I’ve been more alert, attentive, sharper and yes… focused.

Things, ideas, concepts (whatever) at work seem to make more sense, more quickly
because my mind is less cluttered, less distracted, less tired.

A less immutable piece of advice, hm… can something be a little bit or a pretty
much completely immutable?, I digress. A piece of advice that you’ll want to
think and pray about before taking is this: If you get to a place where you’re
spread too thin to learn something, anything well, work towards a change. It may
take a while, but it’s probably going to be a good move.

If you find yourself unable to change things and are required to remain a
generalist, you can still try to be the best generalist around. People will
probably sit up and take notice. Just knowing that you’re truly doing your best
can give you wonderful peace of mind and help you think more clearly and
focused. I’m thinking I’ve said that word a bit to often :).

